---
Title: EmergingBrowser - A minimalistic source space browser
---

Normally when we open a development environment to navigate a large object-oriented software system, we get a view showing us all packages of this system, followed by all classes in each of these packages and all methods of a specific class. If this system is unknown to us, we might be lost by the amount of information being presented to us. It is hard to identify any artifact of importance to our task hand. Provided that we have identified a starting point from where to start further investigation of the source space, a better way to actually navigate the space from there on is a tool we call "emerging browser". A coding session in an emerging browser basically starts with nothing. We might enter a search query containg the term of interest, eg. "login" to debug such a feature. This browser then shows us all source entities being related to login based on their name or comments they contain referring to "login". We can then browse these initial artifacts. For each artifact we browse we get a list of artifacts that are related to this artifact, and so on.
For assigning relatedness we would stick to a model as discussed in this project: [Path in the Forest - Towards a better navigation of source artifacts](%base_url%/wiki/projects/mastersbachelorsprojects/obsolete/pathintheforesttowardsabetternavigationofsourceartifacts)
During this project you implement such an emerging browser based on one specific model for relatedness of source artifacts. This browser can be based on an Eclipse plugin (Java) or on the OmniBrowser framework (Squeak Smalltalk). Another contribution of this project is an assessment of the emerging browser's impact on efficiency of navigation of a software space. If possible, we can also experiment with different models for relatedness.

The main research question to be answered by this project is whether it is more efficient to navigate a source space basically starting with nothing else than a term describing the feature or area of a system we want to work on, then relying on a browser which takes us by the hand and presents us subsequently with the entities related to each other. This approach of browsing a source space of course has to be compared to the traditional approach where basically everything making up the system, eg. all of its packages, classes, method and all other artifacts, are presented to us.
This project is very much related to the path in the forest project, the main difference being that here we invent a completely new approach to browse software instead of showing a navigation path in the context of an existing, traditional way of browsing software systems.

Contact: <a href="mailto:roethlis@iam.unibe.ch">roethlis@iam.unibe.ch</a>

