---
Title: Autumn leaves Garbage collector for windows
---

Most modern environments we use to develop software (Eclipse, Squeak Smalltalk, Cincom Smalltalk, Visual Studio) take use of windows or tabs to open different software artifacts (eg. classes, packages, repository browsers, debuggers, inspectors, text files, etc.). During a typically coding session we normally end up having opened plenty of those windows or tabs, making it hard or even impossible to identify the important windows which we actually want to keep or use for a specific task. This ultimately forces us to open even more windows, maybe even some browsing artifacts we would have already opened in another window or at least already browsed in the past. Early experiments we performed with novice users of the Smalltak environment showed us that people browsed most entities more than twice and often opened a new window to do so. 
To overcome this bad situation seriously hampering the effectiveness of a developer, we propose a model of stickiness for windows. Such a model assigns weight to windows or tabs assessing their importance, ie. the value they provide to the developer. What we eventually want is a garbage collector for windows that takes care of removing windows with a low weight saying that the developer probably does not need them anymore. Of course, the developer should have the opportunity to pin windows that should never get removed or to trigger/halt the garbage collecting of windows manually.
The stickiness model itself can be based on various different means to assess the weight of a window: Selecting a window increases its weight, so does spending time in this window to browse source code or perform other tasks. Windows might have a pre-defined importance, eg. a system browser window should probably be used longer than an inspector window or a window showing the hierarchy of a specific class. Maybe the weight of windows showing a specific source artifact should also increase when we browse the same artifact in another window. Maybe there should be an automatic timer decreasing the weight of windows. This timer could use user actions or opening of new windows as pace-making measure.
There are plenty of ways to implement such a stickiness model for windows. This project aims at contributing some means to determine the weight being assigned to windows, to garbage collect windows based on their weight, to come up with an implementation of this model in a concrete IDE (either Eclipse or Smalltalk), and in particular to empirically assess the usefulness of different means to assess the weight of windows accorrding to their quality of garbage collecting windows in the context of a development environment for object-oriented programming languages. 

Contact: <a href="mailto:roethlis@iam.unibe.ch">roethlis@iam.unibe.ch</a>

